If you haven’t already, please go to google and search “Elon Musk download memories”. If the tidal wave of headlines heralding the impending Kurzweilian singularity make you sad or mad, but you can’t articulate exactly why, then please keep reading. I’m upset, and I happen to have some training that helps me say why.

The full quote, from 2020: “You will be able to save and replay memories. You could potentially download them into a new body or into a robot body.”

It’s a pretty bold statement, even coming from a reliable bold-statement-generator like Elon Musk. Part of me doesn’t believe he believes it. But lots of people believe he does.

Please don’t misunderstand me. Elon Musk has orchestrated some pretty impressive accomplishments. It’s tempting to uncritically believe that he can figure out how to save and replay memories or potentially download them into a new body. And sure, it’s possible that he’ll be the one to make it happen.

But as a neuroscientist, I feel it is my duty to gently nudge myself into this conversation and say that I have no idea what Elon Musk is talking about here.

I mean, this is a tough engineering problem to start with. Chronic implants are just really tricky because brains are mushy things that move around. If you can manage to keep your electrodes next to the same neurons for any extended period of time, you have to contend with them dying (often because you poked or bumped them) or rewiring so drastically that their function shifts. Then there’s the heat of the device, which can alter spiking thresholds and damage tissue. This is the type of challenge Musk excels at. He’ll probably make some great progress here. The Neuralink device, even if it isn’t groundbreaking (yet) in any single dimension, is already a pretty innovative packaging of many existing cutting edge innovations.

When it comes to downloading memories? This is just bad science. Why? Because even if the folks at Neuralink manage to record from enough neurons to fully capture the neural “signature” of some random memory (hint: they aren’t), let alone any arbitrary memory, all they have at the end is a binary train of 1s and 0s. This chorus of spikes can be very useful if it’s coming from the right area. For example, implants in motor cortex can be used to control cursors, robotic arms, and pretty much anything without too many degrees of freedom. We’ve been doing this in animals (including humans) for decades now. But that isn’t because we have understood the chorus of spikes from motor cortex. Rather, it is because we have figured out how to create a learning algorithm that essentially teaches the chorus of spikes and the external effector how to speak to each other. We still have no idea what that chorus of spikes actually means.

Okay, so we don’t know that the spikes mean. Does this necessarily crush Musk’s hopes of a Netflix for Memories? Suppose we extract the chorus of spikes and store it, totally ignorant of its meaning, and then use it as a template for stimulating the brain in order to “replay” the memory. Is this possible? In theory, sure. Stimulating the brain can elicit all types of rich, complex (albeit totally random) memories. And researchers have been trying to reliably manipulate (e.g., extinguish, modify, elicit) specific simple behaviors, including memories, for years. The success we’ve seen typically does not involve electrode stimulation; instead, the researchers are usually using optical stimulation paired with genetic tricks that let them get really selective about which neurons get activated. The kind of electrode stimulation that Neuralink would use is going to drive activity in large swathes of tissue. And this doesn’t even get into the tradeoff between stimulation and impedance: the best materials for electrophysiological recording typically degrade rapidly when you start stimulating with them. There are materials that don’t degrade with stimulation, but they tend to give noisier recordings. Maybe if Neuralink can convince folks to willingly have their genes altered so that some of their neurons will glow when they fire, and also fire when you shine a light on them, an optical solution will present itself.

So yes, while our current theories and technology are absolutely nowhere near where they need to be in order to use a neural recording to stimulate and elicit specific memories in humans, it is at least conceivable that we’ll figure this out. It isn’t incompatible with any of the current science, as far as I’m aware.

But it also doesn’t make much sense to me as a project. Let’s say we’ve got a fantastic recording of the activity of a network of cells, and we’re convinced it encodes a specific memory of, I don’t know, urinating in your grandma’s pool when you were a kid. A recording cannot be helpful in eliciting (via stimulation) this same memory if at least 5 necessary (but probably not sufficient) conditions are not met.

    The recording of this chorus of spikes is sufficient to capture what is essential about the activity that was happening during the memory. And by “essential”, I mean: “it contains the signal that, when played back through stimulation, will reliably elicit the same memory.”
    The electrodes are close enough to the original neurons that they will be able to stimulate them. Neurons have a habit of drifting away from electrodes over time.
    The neurons that get stimulated are still — after days or weeks or years since the recording was made — necessary for that specific memory. Neurons also have a habit of dying or changing their function. Maybe the neurons you’re stimulating are now responsible for remembering the gum wall at your middle school.
    Neuron assemblies responsible for other memories or behaviors do not get driven by the stimulation. You don’t want to accidentally trigger eight other memories, all of which involve you being trapped in the car with your boss during a business trip while he is open-mouth chewing a subway sandwich.
    The stimulation either generates or is preceded by a global state that is necessary for the memory to happen. All neural activity happens in the context of preceding states that modulate the effect of new inputs. A particular sound, e.g., someone’s breath when you are sitting in your room and you have been whispering back and forth with your spouse, will activate specific sensory cells in the cochlea, which will in turn propagate activity to the brainstem, the midbrain, and eventually the cortex, culminating in a complex pattern of activity that accompanies a very pleasant memory of whispering jokes during an opera performance. That very same sound of someone whispering, identical in every physical respect, will always trigger the same sensory cells in the cochlea. But if it happens in a different context, e.g., while you are sitting in your room and you think you are the only one home, the signaling pathway will very rapidly diverge into a different pattern of activity as it spreads, culminating in a memory of the time you broke into a stranger’s house and whispered that you loved them while they sat alone on their bed. There is no good reason to assume that the effects of brain stimulation are not also heavily modulated by the context of preceding neural activity.

Okay, so recording and playing back memories in the same person might be possible, but it is still weird to try and do it. Why? Because if all of the above conditions are met, it means that the memory is still functionally dependent on a network of neurons that hasn’t changed significantly since the recording. Which means that the recording didn’t happen too long ago. Which means that it would be very odd if the person couldn’t, I don’t know, just “replay” the memory on their own if you uttered a few words instead of installing a chip under their skull and perforating their cortex with a lattice of metal wires. In other words, there is literally no use case for this. If a memory no longer exists in the brain of this poor person who fell under the Muskian spell of neuro-marketing, it is because the neurons that sang that song have moved on to doing something else, and no amount of playing that song back to them will force them to learn it again. They might learn to fire in a pattern similar to the pattern of stimulation, but it will have no specific meaning because it is disconnected from the external world; the electrophysiological stimulation isn’t linking the activity to any appropriate sensory signal from the periphery, or plugging it into a network of similar memories that might contextualize it and point it to something that the brain can use to reproduce the original memory. There is simply no way for this new song to have its original meaning. Of course, the brain is fantastic at creating meaning out of noise, so the stimulation will probably produce something interesting, but it won’t be the original memory.

Let me boil all of that down into one sentence: the meaning of the neural activity is inseparable from the brain that produced it.

And for this precise reason, everything we currently know about the brain tells us that it is a trivial thing to record a raster of spikes that happened when person A had a memory, but it is nonsensical to expect that this raster will be anything but noise when we import it into the brain of person B or robot C.

Sorry Kurzweil. Sorry Musk. Sorry reader. Your memories are stuck with your beautiful brain until it changes, in a few years, into a different beautiful brain with a vocabulary of memories that feel the same but are different, still mostly false echoes of something that actually happened to your body.

I hope this clarifies why Elon Musk is making me sad.